# Tape Output and Sound on the ZX80 and ZX81

## Background

Inspired by a conversation with another retro-computer fan, about how to communicate with a modern-day microcontroller from the ZX81 via the mic socket, I decided to look again at how the ZX81 (and, it turns out, the ZX80) save data to tape (and, more specifically, how they send a signal to the mic socket). The mechanism turns out to be very simple: it is amazing it is as reliable as it is.

The mic signal is controlled by two I/O instructions -- see [https://problemkaputt.de/zxdocs.htm#zx80zx81ioports](https://problemkaputt.de/zxdocs.htm#zx80zx81ioports). Writing to port 0xFF sets the mic signal high and reading from port 0xFE sets the mic signal low. These I/O instructions also have 'side effects'. Writing to port 0xFF also ends the Vertical Rescan and resets the Line Counter for the display, hence you seen scree corruption when saving a program. Reading from port 0xFE also tests keyboard (half-row determined by contents of data bus at the time). This second side effect is used to advantage in the `SAVE` routine, which tests for BREAK while also setting mic signal low.

With the 8K ROM, the tape signal is generated by a ROM routine at address 0x031E, called OUT_BYTE -- see [ZX81 ROM Disassembly](https://github.com/ZXSpectrumVault/rom-disassemblies/blob/master/Sinclair%20ZX81/Sinclair-ZX81.asm). This routine produces a sequence of pulses representing the eight bits in a byte. Each pulse is a precisely timed, slightly assymetric square-wave of wavelength 0.308ms (that is, 3.25 kHz) for both '1' and '0' bits. The difference between a '0' and a '1' is the duration of the pulse: 1.232 ms for a '0' and 2.772 ms for a '1'. Between pulses there is a gap of 1.356 ms.

I have extracted the source for OUT_BYTE into a [self-contained routine](zx81_tape_write.asm). This routine could be integrated into a simple communication tool for the mic socket.

The SAVE routine is also described in Appendix I of Ian Logan's book "Understanding your ZX81 ROM".


## Music on the ZX81 (and ZX80)

When investigating the SAVE routine, I remembered an example program written by Toni Baker in [Mastering Machine Code on Your ZX81](https://dn790000.ca.archive.org/0/items/masteringmachinecodeonyourzx81/MasteringMachineCodeOnYourZX81.pdf) which allowed the ZX81 (and ZX80) to make music. It turns out this is done by sending different signal frequencies to the mic socket, based on different key presses (a kind of primative musical instrument). To hear the sound, you need to connect something to your mic socket; ideally, amplified as the signal is weak.

I have typed in the [routine](music.asm) for the ZX81 (8K BASIC ROM) and, following Toni's directions, adapted it for the ZX80 (that is, 4K BASIC ROM). I also extended both programs, so that they could be exited by pressing Shift-0. The two versions are ready to run (provided you have a ZXpand card) from [music.p](music.p) and [music.o](music.o), respectively. Simply load the program using the ZXpand and enter `RUN`.

You can also run the music program in the [EightyOne emulator](https://sourceforge.net/projects/eightyone-sinclair-emulator/): you need to enable Video Sound in the Options menu.
